Once around the ice cube neutrino
observatory. So this amazing building
that you can see in this picture is
located almost at the south pole 89° 59
minutes and 24 seconds south. And then
we also have a longitude 63 2711 west.
But to be honest, when you're that close
to the pole, it really doesn't make any
difference because all all the
longitudes meet um at the uh south pole
point. So 63 west isn't very far from 63
east to be fair.
Construction began in 2009. And there's
this lovely photograph of the machinery
at the surface and a lot of the cable
assemblies, great big drums of cables.
And uh it took just over a year to be
completed by December of 2010. So it's
15 years ago to the date that I'm
writing this talk.
And it's a very strange observatory.
It's composed of a cubic kilometer of
ice deep under the surface down from
about 1500 meters down to 2.5 km below
the laboratory which is the little tiny
lab building shown in the blue at the
top there. And then there are 86 holes
that have been drilled down all the way
down to this cubic kilometer of ice and
sensors, 5,160
of them lowered on strings into the
holes in the ice that those are going to
then collect the data and relay it all
back to the surface. And you've got the
Eiffel Tower there for scale. That's
only 324 m tall. So you can see this is
a very large uh drilling operation
indeed. And the strings of sensors are
optical sensors. This is one of them.
They're digital optical module, a DOM.
It's got a photo multiplier tube in it
and a small computer to collect the
information and then relay it by cable
back to the laboratory on the surface.
And the optical modules are looking for
sharenoff radiation. Some people
pronounce it churenov radiation. It
really doesn't matter.
This is light, but it's light that has
been triggered by the motion of charged
particles through the medium through the
ice in this particular case or the water
or the air. Um, and it's triggered by
very very high-speed high energy
particles coming from space. They are
moving at very close to the absolute
maximum speed of the speed of light in
the vacuum of space. And then they enter
the earth's atmosphere and they may
collide creating a shower of particles.
Each particle then hitting other air
molecules and creating more showers of
particles making their way down to the
ground as shown on the left. Um or you
can get them from
high energy particles from a nuclear
reactor. And on the right we have a
picture of a nuclear reactor, one of
those swimming pool nuclear reactors
where there's a lot of water being used
as the moderator. And the blue glow from
the reactor there is the sharenoff
radiation.
So this is high-speed particles,
electrons, posetrons, muons, towel
particles, all sorts of high energy
elementary particles moving very very
fast indeed. And in fact they are moving
so nearly the maximum upper speed limit
C the speed of light in a vacuum that
it's faster than the local speed of
light in the material. The reason that
light is refracted when it goes through
glass or through water is that it is
essentially slower when moving through
the medium than it is in the freedom of
a vacuum of outer space. But if a
particle carrying a lot of energy and
momentum enters something like the
swimming pool here or the atmosphere or
a block of ice, it can be initially
moving faster than the local speed of
light and that causes this strange
sharenoff radiation to be emitted and it
has this characteristic blue glow.
So this is the idea. Cosmic rays coming
into the atmosphere,
colliding and making showers of
additional particles that then come down
to the ground. Um and these can have
arisen from all sorts of astrophysical
sources, supernovi, quazars, black hole
jets, all kinds of things as long as
they have enormous energy can create
these cosmic rays. But we are really
interested here with a different type of
particle called a neutrino. The little
neutral one. First suggested as being an
essential element of nuclear reactions
carrying away some of the momentum and
uh also accounting for something called
the conservation of leptton number.
Because
if you have two protons that merge
together in nuclear fusion, one of them
turns from a positively charged proton
into a neutron and an anti-electron, a
positron is spat out, you've created one
of these light particles. The neutrons
and protons are barons. They're heavy
particles. The anti-electron, the
positron is a leptton. And you seem to
have made minus one
lepton's worth of particle because it's
an antiparticle. It's negative. And to
balance that, since leptton number is
conserved, you have to have created plus
one's worth of leptton as well. And that
is a neutrino. These little tiny
electrically neutral particles that
carry away that excess lepttonness. Um,
and that's very strange indeed, but it
was predicted back in the 1930s and
finally detected in 1956
and then confirmed and measured going
forward into the 1960s and '7s
as being a vital part of all of this
nuclear physics.
Now the neutrinos being neutral, not
carrying any positive charge. You can
see here we started with two positive
charges on the protons. We ended up with
one in the nucleus. The neutron counts
for nothing and the anti-electron
carried the spare positive charge away.
And so the neutrino is indeed not
carrying any electric charge. And they
are incredibly elusive. They hardly
react with ordinary matter at all. It's
said that you could have something like
3 and a half thousand light years of
solid lead and you would only have a 50%
chance of a neutrino being blocked by
such an enormous obstruction.
Well,
that means that actually they can pass
almost unhindered through an object like
the earth. It uh is such that other
types of cosmic rays rain down on the
earth all the time. But they are always
detected moving downwards through our
ice cube detector
coming in from above because they fail
to penetrate through the body of the
earth. But neutrinos just don't really
care very much about the earth and they
can move through in either direction.
Obviously the earth creates the tiniest
of shadowing effect. Um there are some
that are blocked but it's such an
insignificant number that uh we see
nearly as many from below as from above.
And so actually if we see a particle
coming from below the chances are that
the origin was a neutrino
and so ice cube at the south pole is a
really good northern hemisphere object
telescope for neutrinos. Now you might
think we wouldn't see anything at all
because uh the chance of an individual
neutrino interacting with a body that
even the mass of the earth is so low.
But there are so many of them. There are
literally trillions of them passing
through your fingertips right now in
every second. And they have origins all
over the universe. The sun is a
particularly strong source of them
nearby obviously with all that nuclear
fusion that goes on in there. And we've
detected them from our nuclear reactors.
You can turn nuclear reactors on and off
and we can measure the change in the
neutrino flux that's coming from them.
Um and it works uh beautifully as an
experiment.
So, the astronomical ones that we're
looking for from beyond the solar
system,
beyond the sun, out there in deep space
could well be from exploding stars.
These are obviously so violent with a
lot of nuclear processes going on that a
huge storm of neutrinos is released
every time a giant star explodes. And
Ice Cube is part of our early warning
system for detecting supernovi,
particularly nearby supernovi.
A sudden increase in the rate of
neutrino detection would be a good sign
that
uh supernova has just exploded. In fact,
the neutrinos have a habit of arriving
first. That's because the enormous
release is deep inside the supernova and
they pretty much come straight out
unimpeded by the overlying layers of the
dying star. Whereas the flash of
electromagnetic light, the gamma rays,
x-rays, optical light, and so forth, has
to fight its way out through all of the
um millions of miles worth of overlying
material and can be delayed by a
substantial uh amount, maybe a few days
even before it actually bursts forth.
And so we can sometimes see the neutrino
flash before the optical flash. And that
would be great if we could do that and
immediately slew our optical telescopes
onto the supernova. We would be be able
to catch it at the very first instant of
visibility. So very important for
studying such things.
Even more powerful than ordinary
supernovi are gamma ray bursts. These
are the hypernova explosions of truly
massive stars and across the universe.
they happen fairly frequently. Uh we
detect one a day, something like that,
um across the whole of the sky. And we
would be very very interested in being
able to see these um before the uh
optical apparatent explosion by
detecting the nutrinos. Now, so far
we've not managed to do that. It would
be really useful if we could get the
sensitivity of Ice Cube up and running
and be able to detect a gamma ray burst
just before the uh enormous flash of
electromagnetic radiation.
Now, we have detected some incredibly
powerful neutrinos. Back in 2013, just 3
years into its operation, Ice Cube
detected 28 neutrinos coming from beyond
the solar system. Now, 28 nutrinos out
of the trillions that go through every
second is not very many. Um, I told you
they didn't uh tend to react with matter
very much. That gives you some idea. But
some of them do and a couple of them
were enormously powerful in the PA
electron volt range. an electron volt.
The energy that you need to uh
accelerate an electron across a onevolt
uh boundary in an electromagnetic field
is not very much. But a pet electron
volt, well that's uh 10 ^ 15 of those.
So that's a lot of energy for a single
particle to be carrying. Um, and the
first two that were in that range were
given the names Bert and Ernie straight
out of uh, well, you know where that's
from, don't you? And there was an even
more energetic one that arrived, so
obviously it had to be called Big Bird.
I love it.
What we have managed to see is a blazer.
September 2017,
an extremely high energy neutrino was
detected and we were able to trace it
back to the direction of the
constellation of Orion. And it turned
out that it was from the jet of an
active galactic nucleus, a feeding super
massive black hole deep in the heart of
an ancient galaxy a long way away across
the universe. So this nutrino had been
created there uh billions of years ago
and then made its way across and finally
crashed into uh an atom inside our
detector and created a shower of the
sharenoff radiation that we could detect
and from the direction track back. We
found another one in 2022. Another
neutrino, this time from the core of the
galaxy, Messier 77. This is a picture of
Messier 77. There's obviously, as there
is with all galaxies, a super massive
black hole right in the center. And the
interaction of that with infalling
matter forming an accretion disc in the
center had evidently accelerated
particles up to enormous energies such
that we were seeing these high energy
neutrinos.
The year before in 2021 we saw the first
case of a star being torn apart by a
black hole a so-called tidal disruption
event. And this was detected by
neutrinos and we got another one the
next year and they have those catalog
numbers AT209
DSG and FDR. Um so they were measured in
2019 and analyzed and the papers were
released in 2021 and 2022.
Another detection Ice Cube has managed
in 2023, just two years ago now, was to
identify neutrinos coming from all along
the plane of our galaxy. So, we've got
an optical strip image at the top there
of the Milky Way spread out with the
bulge in the center and all those dark
dust lanes and then a map of the
intensity of neutrino arrival. And you
can see that it's more s substantial in
and around the region near the center of
the galaxy. Um, and then there are a
couple of hot spots further out and
those correspond to well-known uh
pulsars, the Veiler pulsar and the Crab
Nebula, uh, to be precise. So, we're
seeing neutrinos coming from those
sources as well. Now, why do we care
about these neutrinos? Well, addition to
getting early warning of gamma ray
bursts and supernova events and being
able to slew our telescopes on target,
maybe and maybe some of the neutrinos
shown in this map here from the center
of the galaxy might help us understand
what's going on with dark matter.
hypothesized to be a strange particle, a
wimp, a weakly interacting, massive
particle, weakly interacting because it
literally uses the weak force to
interact with things. Not the
electromagnetic force, not the strong
force. Would have mass otherwise we
wouldn't have hypothesized they exist at
all because it's the gravity that's
putting us onto the fact that this extra
mass exists. But if it only interacts
through the weak force, then it may well
be um that we have these unknown
undetected but massive particles. And in
fact, neutrinos we believe interact by
the weak force and gravity and they're
not electromagnetic and they don't
interact with the strong force. So in
fact, neutrinos are a type of weakly
interacting particle. They're just not
very massive. Indeed, when they were
originally suggested, people thought
they were zero mass, but we now know
that they have a nonzero but very, very
small amount of mass. But with with
these dark matter particles, we think
these would have much higher mass. And
if the effect of gravity is to
concentrate them into the core of
massive objects like galaxies or stars,
then perhaps even in the center of the
sun, you would get a concentration of
these wimps and maybe they would
interact with each other through the
weak force perhaps and that could
trigger the release of additional
neutrinos. And if we could detect those,
maybe it would tell us something about
the uh possibility that these wimps
might exist.
Now, I mentioned that nutrinos don't
have zero mass as was originally
suggested for them and that is a feature
that we have detected by studying the
flux of neutrinos coming from the sun.
When first measured, the number of
neutrinos that seemed to be coming from
the sun was well under what it should
have been for the amount of nuclear
fusion that we thought was going on
inside the core of the sun. There should
have been nearly three times as many
neutrinos.
And the explanation for that is that
there are in fact three types of
neutrino, three flavors. electron
neutrinos, muon neutrinos and toao
neutrinos in increasing order of mass.
And these correspond to the ordinary
electrons, the muons and the towel
particles which are the three types of
leptons with electrons being the
lightest. 200 times heavier is a muon
and even heavier still the very rare
ton.
And with the neutrinos having mass that
allows them to flip between and
oscillate between the different flavors.
So all those changes indicated by the
arrows can go on. And that is why by the
time they've been all emitted as one
flavor, the electron neutrinos coming
from the sun, by the time they get to
Earth, twothirds of them have flipped
into mu and tow neutrinos. And so our
detectors, which are only sensitive to
the electron neutrinos, were only seeing
a third of them. And if we can measure
the arrival and the numbers of the other
two types, then we can work out exactly
how that flipping is behaving and we
should be able to get a handle on the
ratio of masses. And that has been done
and it's very helpful in giving us some
constraints on our theories. And we now
can't measure the masses of them
directly, but we are able to use these
neutrino observations to work out what
the ratio of the masses is. So we still
don't know the absolute level, but we do
have a very good idea of how much
heavier the tow is than the mu and how
much heavier that is than the electron
neutrino.
Now, string theory
predicts the existence of a fourth type
of neutrino called a sterile neutrino
that is kind of none of the other three.
And if such things existed and we were
able to detect them, that would be a
very good confirmation of the ideas of
string theory. Um, it would be able to
let us constrain some of the myriad
possibilities, pin down what we suspect
about the number of extra dimensions all
curled up um, in the whole idea of the
uh, extensions beyond Einstein's simple
four-dimensional gravity uh, with three
dimensions of space and time into all
these curled up dimensions of 10 or 11
even. Um, and a sterile neutrino would
help us understand that and perhaps also
help us understand some of the odd
features of what we think is going on at
the Big Bang. But so far, Ice Cube can't
find any. And maybe that is ruling the
ideas out. After the uh 15 years or so
of operation, we're pretty sure that
we're not seeing any of these sterile
neutrinos. So although that's not a
detection, it's the detection of the
absence of something. Maybe that's
telling us which uh a lot of people are
beginning to suspect that maybe although
string theory has predicted a lot of
things and none of them have been
detected and it's been very helpful in
studying it in the development of a lot
of complex mathematics. Maybe that's not
really what's going on underneath and
that the idea of strings needs to be
looked at again from a different
perspective. And I tend to favor that.
I've never really quite been a fan of
string theory.
Anyway, that's the Ice Cube Observatory
down there at the South Pole studying
these ghostly particles from all kinds
of different astrophysical sources
across the universe.
So thanks very much for listening.